Tidy Data Code Book
========================================================

This Code Book describes the variables used in the `run_analysis.R` script and serves as a simple data ditctionary for the variables in the `tidy_dataset.txt` file generated by that script.
__________

Key Files
---------

The scirpt file, the directory containing the source (raw) data, and the output file generated respectively are listed below: 

```{r}
run_analysis.R
./UCI HAR Dataset/
tidy_dataset.txt
```


Script Variables
----------------

First the path names are loaded:
```{r}
path
test_path
train_path
```
<br />

Next the raw data are loaded into work tables for temporary use. The names are derived from the actual files with filenames converted to all lower case for consistency. The .txt extention is replaced with _tbl where the data are placed in tables that will be modified and _raw where the data will not undergo any transformation.
```{r}
sub_test_tbl 
x_test_tbl 
y_test_tbl 
sub_train_tbl 
x_train_tbl 
y_train_tbl
features_raw
```  
<br />
Pre-processing begins with cleaning up the data variable names by removing any symbols or other punctuation that might lead to syntactic errors when processing with R or by one of the various R libraries. To improve readability while maintaining consistency with the original names [camelCase](http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?CamelCase) notation is combined with special characters and strings of special characters  replaced with a single period. While this decision may require more thought and use of the shift key when typing in code, it should reduce any potential provenance ambiguity in matching the "cleaned" variables with the those in the original data.

The resulting character list and a six-level factor list for the activities monitored are respectively given the values:
```{r}
features
activities
```
<br />
All of raw data are combined into one work table named: `super_tble`

Two lists of integers are used to isolate the columns of values selected for the tidy version of the data. This is done to extract only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement. These lists are respectively named:
```{r}
mean_cols
std_cols
```
Note: only actual measurements are considered and not the aggregated means of frequencies or pattern estimates.

This subset is stored in a working table named: `extracted_tbl`

<br />
Next, the data are aranged by subject & activity (interim table: `sub_act_tbl`) and sumarized by average for each observation producing the `tidy_tbl`

Finally, the tidy data are saved to a coma-separated values (CSV) text file named:
```{r}
tidy_dataset.txt
```
in the current working directory.

Data Variables
--------------
The data variables in the output (`tidy_dataset.txt`) file represent averaged readings for each activity of each subject observed in the original study (see the `README.md` file in this repository for details).

Variable names were derived from the orignal names using [camelCase](http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?CamelCase) notation to improve readability. For consistency with the source data while guaranteeing compatibility with R scripting. Special characters and strings of special characters were transformed to a single period. Examples are show below:

|   Original Variable   |   | Modified Name        |
|-----------------------|---|----------------------|
|  tBodyAcc-mean()-X     |  |      tBodyAcc.mean.X |
| tBodyAcc-mean()-Y   |  |      tBodyAcc.mean.X |
| tBodyAcc-mean()-Z   |  |      tBodyAcc.mean.X |
| tBodyAcc-std()-X   |  |      tBodyAcc.mean.X |
|tBodyAcc-std()-Y   |  |      tBodyAcc.mean.X |
| tBodyAcc-std()-Z   |  |      tBodyAcc.mean.X |
|tBodyAcc-mad()-X   |  |      tBodyAcc.mean.X |
| tBodyAcc-mad()-Y   |  |      tBodyAcc.mean.X |
|  tBodyAcc-mad()-Z   |  |      tBodyAcc.mean.X |
| tBodyAcc-max()-X   |  |      tBodyAcc.mean.X |
| ...                |  | ... |
| fBodyBodyGyroMag-mean() |  |fBodyBodyGyroMag.mean |
| fBodyBodyGyroMag-std()  |  |fBodyBodyGyroMag.std |

